What's new in F# 9 (#43260)
dotnet/docs: docs/fsharp/whats-new/fsharp-9.md

---
title: What's new in F# 9 - F# Guide
description: Find information on the new features available in F# 9.
ms.date: 11/12/2024
ms.topic: whats-new
---

# What's new in F# 9

F# 9 introduces a range of enhancements that make your programs safer, more resilient, and performant. This article highlights the major changes in F# 9, developed in the [F#'s open source code repository](https://github.com/dotnet/fsharp).

You can download the latest .NET SDK from the [.NET downloads page](https://dotnet.microsoft.com/download).

> ## F# language changes

Reviewer: I have looked at the rendered preview and it would be IMO better if the individual language changes were directly availlable as links in the generated menu on top, in the "In This article" section.

But that would mean moving the individual language changes to become a '##' each, is that possible?

Author: I think so. We can put language changes at H2 level and keep the rest as it is.

This section describes updates to the language itself, changes you will notice when writing or reading F# code.

### Nullable reference types

Although F# is designed to avoid `null`, it can creep in when interfacing with .NET libraries written in C#. F# now provides a type-safe way to deal with reference types that can have `null` as a valid value.

For more details, watch out for an [upcoming blog post about this feature](https://devblogs.microsoft.com/dotnet/tag/f/).

Here are some examples:

> <pre><code class="language-fsharp">// Declared type at let-binding

Reviewer: The class=language-fsharp is what is used in wordpress.
I guess in the dotnet/docs, you just use the regular triple-apostrophes with the "fsharp" moniker to make it rendere well.

    person.contact.IsEmail
```

### Partial active patterns can return `bool` instead of `unit option`

Previously, partial active patterns would return `Some ()` to indicate a match and `None` otherwise. Now, they can also return `bool`.

For example, the active pattern for the following:
```fsharp
match key with
| CaseInsensitive "foo" -> ...
| CaseInsensitive "bar" -> ...
```

Would previously be written as:
```fsharp
let (|CaseInsensitive|_|) (pattern: string) (value: string) =
    if String.Equals(value, pattern, StringComparison.OrdinalIgnoreCase) then
        Some ()
    else
        None
```

Now, you can instead write:

```fsharp
let (|CaseInsensitive|_|) (pattern: string) (value: string) =
    String.Equals(value, pattern, StringComparison.OrdinalIgnoreCase)
```

### Prefer extension methods to intrinsic properties when arguments are provided

To align with a pattern seen in some .NET libraries, where extension methods are defined with the same names as intrinsic properties of a type, F# will now resolve these extension methods instead of failing the type check.

Example:

```fsharp
type Foo() =
    member val X : int = 0 with get, set

[&ltExtension&gt;]
type FooExt =

>     [&ltExtension&gt;]

Reviewer: Since we are not in WP anymore, do not escape angle brackets.

    static member X (f: Foo, i: int) = f.X <- i; f

let f = Foo()

f.X(1) // We can now call the extension method to set the property and chain further calls
```

### Support for empty-bodied computation expressions

F# now supports empty [computation expressions](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/fsharp/language-reference/computation-expressions).

> <pre class="language-fsharp"><code>let xs = seq { } // Empty sequence```

Reviewer: Bad rendering.

<pre><code>&gt; #help List.map;;

Description:
Builds a new collection whose elements are the results of applying the given function
to each of the elements of the collection.

Parameters:
- mapping: The function to transform elements from the input list.
- list: The input list.
Returns:
The list of transformed elements.

Examples:
let inputs = [ "a"; "bbb"; "cc" ]

inputs |> List.map (fun x -> x.Length)
// Evaluates to [ 1; 3; 2 ]

Full name: Microsoft.FSharp.Collections.ListModule.map
Assembly: FSharp.Core.dll
```

### Allow #nowarn to support the FS prefix on error codes to disable warnings

Previously, when you wanted to disable a warning and wrote `#nowarn "FS0057"`, you would get an `Invalid warning number 'FS0057'`. Even though the warning number is correct, it just wasn't supposed to have the `FS` prefix.

Now, you won't have to spend time figuring that out because the warning numbers are accepted even with the prefix.

All of these will now work:
```fsharp
#nowarn 57
#nowarn 0057
#nowarn FS0057

#nowarn "57"
#nowarn "0057"
#nowarn "FS0057"
```

It's probably a good idea to stick to the same style throughout your project.

> ### Warning about TailCall attribute on non-rec functions or let-bound values

Reviewer: Rendering stops here for some reason, broken.

F# will now emit a warning when you put the `[<TailCall>]` attribute somewhere it doesn't belong. While it has no effect on what the code does, it could confuse someone reading it.

> For example, these will now emit a warning:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, these usages will now emit a warning:
```

```fsharp
[&lt;TailCall&gt;]
let someNonRecFun x = x + x

[&lt;TailCall&gt;]
let someX = 23

[&lt;TailCall&gt;]
let rec someRecLetBoundValue = nameof(someRecLetBoundValue)
```

### Enforce attribute targets

The compiler now correctly enforces the `AttributeTargets` on let values, functions, union case declarations, implicit constructors, structs, and classes. This can prevent some hard-to-notice bugs, such as forgetting to add the unit argument to an Xunit test.

> Previously, you could have written:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Previously, you could write:
```

```fsharp
[&lt;Fact&gt;]
let ``this test always fails`` =
  Assert.True(false)
```

> Run the tests with `dotnet test` and they would pass. Since the test function is not actually a function, it is ignored by the test runner.

Reviewer: I would do this more motivational - this has really cost be a lot of time figuring out why the hell my tests were not running. It really is a big help!

Author: I'm taking suggestions :) Not sure how to hype it up. Also this is now documentation and not a blog post, so it should be more matter-of-fact.

Reviewer 3: @T-Gro @0101 

Do you want to wait to merge this while you revise this section? Or should I go ahead and merge it?

Everything else looks great.

Author: Let's merge it, it can always be improved later.

> Run the tests with `dotnet test` and they would pass. Since the test function is not actually a function, it is ignored by the test runner.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When you ran the tests with `dotnet test`, they would pass. Since the test function is not actually a function, it was ignored by the test runner.
```

Now, with correct attribute enforcement, you will get an `error FS0842: This attribute is not valid for use on this language element`.

## Updates to the standard library (FSharp.Core)

### Random functions for collections

The `List`, `Array`, and `Seq` modules have new functions for random sampling and shuffling. This makes F# easier to use for common data science, machine learning, game development, and other scenarios where randomness is needed.

> All functions have variants using:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All functions have the following variants:
```

> * An implicit thread-safe shared [`Random`](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.random) instance

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* One that uses an implicit, thread-safe, shared <xref:System.Random> instance
```

> * Taking a `Random` instance as an argument

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* One that takes a `Random` instance as an argument
```

> * Taking a custom `randomizer` function, which should return a float value greater than or equal to 0.0 and less than 1.0

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* One that takes a custom `randomizer` function, which should return a float value greater than or equal to 0.0 and less than 1.0
```

> There are four functions (each with three variants) available:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are four functions (each with three variants) available: `Shuffle`, `Choice`, `Choices`, and `Sample`.
```

#### Shuffle

> The shuffle functions return a new collection of the same type and size, with each item in a randomly mixed position. The chance to end up in any position is weighted evenly on the length of the collection.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `Shuffle` functions return a new collection of the same type and size, with each item in a randomly mixed position. The chance to end up in any position is weighted evenly on the length of the collection.
```

```fsharp
let allPlayers = [ "Alice"; "Bob"; "Charlie"; "Dave" ]
let round1Order = allPlayers |> List.randomShuffle // [ "Charlie"; "Dave"; "Alice"; "Bob" ]
```

> For arrays, there are also `InPlace` variants that shuffle the array in place.

Reviewer: Explain "in place".

#### Choice

> The choice functions return a single random element from the given collection. The random choice is weighted evenly on the size of the collection.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `Choice` functions return a single random element from the given collection. The random choice is weighted evenly on the size of the collection.
```

```fsharp
let allPlayers = [ "Alice"; "Bob"; "Charlie"; "Dave" ]
let randomPlayer = allPlayers |> List.randomChoice // "Charlie"
```

#### Choices

> Choices select N elements from the input collection in random order, allowing elements to be selected more than once.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `Choices` functions select N elements from the input collection in random order, allowing elements to be selected more than once.
```

```fsharp
let weather = [ "Raining"; "Sunny"; "Snowing"; "Windy" ]
let forecastForNext3Days = weather |> List.randomChoices 3 // [ "Windy"; "Snowing"; "Windy" ]
```

#### Sample

> Sample selects N elements from the input collection in random order, without allowing elements to be selected more than once. N cannot be greater than the collection length.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `Sample` functions select N elements from the input collection in random order, without allowing elements to be selected more than once. N cannot be greater than the collection length.
```

```fsharp
let foods = [ "Apple"; "Banana"; "Carrot"; "Donut"; "Egg" ]
let today'sMenu = foods |> List.randomSample 3 // [ "Donut"; "Apple"; "Egg" ]
```

For a full list of functions and their variants, see ([RFC #1135](https://github.com/fsharp/fslang-design/blob/main/RFCs/FS-1135-random-functions-for-collections.md)).

### Parameterless constructor for `CustomOperationAttribute`

> This makes it easier to create a custom operation for a computation expression builder. It will use the name of the method instead of having to explicitly name it (when in most cases the name matches the method name already).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This constructor makes it easier to create a custom operation for a computation expression builder. It uses the name of the method instead of having to explicitly name it (when in most cases the name matches the method name already).
```

```fsharp
type FooBuilder() =

>     [&lt;CustomOperation&gt;]  // Previously would have to be [&lt;CustomOperation("bar")&gt;]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    [&lt;CustomOperation&gt;]  // Previously had to be [&lt;CustomOperation("bar")&gt;]
```

    member _.bar(state) = state
```

### C# collection expression support for F# lists and sets

When using F# lists and sets from C#, you can now use collection expressions to initialize them.

Instead of:

> <pre><code class="language-csharp">FSharpSet&lt;int&gt; mySet = SetModule.FromArray([1, 2, 3]);

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion
```csharp
FSharpSet&lt;int&gt; mySet = SetModule.FromArray([1, 2, 3]);
````

```

You can now write:

> <pre><code class="language-csharp">FSharpSet&lt;int&gt; mySet = [ 1, 2, 3 ];

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion
```csharp
FSharpSet&lt;int&gt; mySet = [ 1, 2, 3 ];
````

```

> This makes it easier to use the F# immutable collections from C#, for example when you need their structural equality, which `System.Collections.Immutable` collections don't have.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Collection expressions make it easier to use the F# immutable collections from C#. You might want to use the F# collections when you need their structural equality, which <xref:System.Collections.Immutable> collections don't have.
```

## Quality of life improvements

### Parser recovery

> There have been continuous improvements in parser recovery, meaning that tooling (e.g. syntax highlighting) still works with code when you're in the middle of editing it and it may not be syntactically correct at all times.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There have been continuous improvements in parser recovery, meaning that tooling (for example, syntax highlighting) still works with code when you're in the middle of editing it and it might not be syntactically correct at all times.
```

For example, the parser will now recover on unfinished `as` patterns, object expressions, enum case declarations, record declarations, complex primary constructor patterns, unresolved long identifiers, empty match clauses, missing union case fields, and missing union case field types.

### Diagnostics

Diagnostics, or understanding what the compiler doesn't like about your code, are an important part of the user experience with F#. There are a number of new or improved diagnostic messages or more precise diagnostic locations in F# 9.

> These include:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These include:

```

- Ambiguous override method in object expression
- Abstract members when used in non-abstract classes

> - When a property has the same name as a discriminated union case

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Property that has the same name as a discriminated union case
```

- Active pattern argument count mismatch
- Unions with duplicated fields
- Using `use!` with `and!` in computation expressions

> There is also a new compile-time error for classes with over 65,520 methods in generated [IL](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/standard/managed-code#intermediate-language--execution). Such classes won't be loadable by the CLR and would result in a runtime error. (Not that you would ever really want to have so many methods, but there have been cases with generated code.)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There is also a new compile-time error for classes with over 65,520 methods in generated [IL](../../standard/managed-code.md#intermediate-language--execution). Such classes aren't loadable by the CLR and would result in a run-time error. (Not that you would ever really want to have so many methods, but there have been cases with generated code.)
```

### Real visibility

There is a quirk with how F# generates assemblies that results in private members being written to [IL](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/standard/managed-code#intermediate-language--execution) as internal. This allows inappropriate access to private members from non-F# projects that have access to an F# project via [`InternalsVisibleTo`](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.runtime.compilerservices.internalsvisibletoattribute).

Now, there is an opt-in fix for this behavior available via the `--realsig+` compiler flag. Try it in your solution to see if any of your projects depend on this behavior. You can add it to your `.fsproj` files like this:

<pre><code class="language-xml">&lt;PropertyGroup&gt;

>     &lt;OtherFlags&gt;--realsig+&lt;/OtherFlags&gt;

Reviewer: It does have a proper element to configure and not via OtherFlags. (did not have it before)

&lt;/PropertyGroup&gt;
```

## Performance improvements

### Optimized equality checks

Equality checks are now faster and allocate less memory.

For example:

```fsharp
[&lt;Struct&gt;]
type MyId =
    val Id: int
    new id = { Id = id }

let ids = Array.init 1000 MyId
let missingId = MyId -1

// used to box 1000 times, doesn't box anymore

> let _ = ids |> Array.contains missingId```

Reviewer: People love BDN tables, I think this one could use a small copy paste of the results to really show how good the improvement is.

You can read all the details here: [F# Developer Stories: How we’ve finally fixed a 9-year-old performance issue](https://devblogs.microsoft.com/dotnet/fsharp-developer-stories-how-weve-finally-fixed-a-9yearold-performance-issue/).

### Field sharing for struct discriminated unions

> If fields in multiple cases of a struct discriminated union have the same name and type, they can share the same location, reducing the struct's memory footprint. (Previously, same field names weren't allowed, so there are no issues with binary compatibility.)

Reviewer: location => memory location

incl. examples? ("sizeof()" can help). There is a big test called "Union struct can share fields with equal name and type" which does have interesting examples with showing the size impact already.

Reviewer: Within that test, the "SharingAfterErasure" shows a lot.

Example:

```fsharp
type Foo() =
    member val X : int = 0 with get, set

[&ltExtension>]
type FooExt =
    [&ltExtension>]
    static member X (f: Foo, i: int) = f.X <- i; f

let f = Foo()

f.X(1) // We can now call the extension method to set the property and chain further calls
```

## Support for empty-bodied computation expressions

F# now supports empty [computation expressions](../language-reference/computation-expressions.md).

```fsharp
let xs = seq { } // Empty sequence
```

```fsharp
let html =
    div {
        p { "Some content." }
        p { } // Empty paragraph
    }
```

Writing an empty computation expression will result in a call to the CE builder's `Zero` method.

This is a more natural syntax compared to the previously available `builder { () }`.

## Hash directives are allowed to take non-string arguments

Hash directives for the compiler previously only allowed string arguments passed in quotes. Now, they can take any type of argument.

Previously, you had:
```fsharp
#nowarn "0070"
#time "on"
```

Now, you can write:
```fsharp
#nowarn 0070
#time on
```

This also ties into the next two changes.

> ## Extended #help directive in fsi to show documentation in the REPL

Reviewer 4: Maybe also reference the blog post about it - for more details.

    if String.Equals(value, pattern, StringComparison.OrdinalIgnoreCase) then
        Some ()
    else
        None
```

Now, you can instead write:

```fsharp
let (|CaseInsensitive|_|) (pattern: string) (value: string) =
    String.Equals(value, pattern, StringComparison.OrdinalIgnoreCase)
```

## Prefer extension methods to intrinsic properties when arguments are provided

To align with a pattern seen in some .NET libraries, where extension methods are defined with the same names as intrinsic properties of a type, F# now resolves these extension methods instead of failing the type check.

Example:

```fsharp
type Foo() =
    member val X : int = 0 with get, set

[&ltExtension>]
type FooExt =
    [&ltExtension>]
    static member X (f: Foo, i: int) = f.X <- i; f

let f = Foo()

f.X(1) // We can now call the extension method to set the property and chain further calls
```

## Empty-bodied computation expressions

F# now supports empty [computation expressions](../language-reference/computation-expressions.md).

```fsharp
let xs = seq { } // Empty sequence
```

```fsharp
let html =
    div {
        p { "Some content." }
        p { } // Empty paragraph
    }
```

> Writing an empty computation expression will result in a call to the CE builder's `Zero` method.

Reviewer 3: Should "CE" be spelled out as "computation expression"? (I don't know if that's a common term for F# developers)

Reviewer 5: I think it's a common term, but I think it should be spelled out

to each of the elements of the collection.

Parameters:
- mapping: The function to transform elements from the input list.
- list: The input list.
Returns:
The list of transformed elements.

Examples:
let inputs = [ "a"; "bbb"; "cc" ]

inputs |> List.map (fun x -> x.Length)
// Evaluates to [ 1; 3; 2 ]

Full name: Microsoft.FSharp.Collections.ListModule.map
Assembly: FSharp.Core.dll
```

See [Enhancing #help in F# Interactive blog post](https://devblogs.microsoft.com/dotnet/enhancing-help-in-fsi/) for more details.

## Allow #nowarn to support the FS prefix on error codes to disable warnings

Previously, when you wanted to disable a warning and wrote `#nowarn "FS0057"`, you would get an `Invalid warning number 'FS0057'`. Even though the warning number is correct, it just wasn't supposed to have the `FS` prefix.

Now, you won't have to spend time figuring that out because the warning numbers are accepted even with the prefix.

All of these will now work:

```fsharp
#nowarn 57
#nowarn 0057
#nowarn FS0057

#nowarn "57"
#nowarn "0057"
#nowarn "FS0057"
```

It's a good idea to use the same style throughout your project.

> ## Warning about TailCall attribute on non-rec functions or let-bound values

Reviewer 3: In the heading, should we spell out non-rec?

```suggestion
## Warning about TailCall attribute on non-recursive functions or let-bound values
```

F# now emits a warning when you put the `[<TailCall>]` attribute somewhere it doesn't belong. While it has no effect on what the code does, it could confuse someone reading it.

For example, these usages will now emit a warning:

```fsharp
[<TailCall>]
let someNonRecFun x = x + x

[<TailCall>]
let someX = 23

[<TailCall>]
let rec someRecLetBoundValue = nameof(someRecLetBoundValue)
```

## Enforce attribute targets

The compiler now correctly enforces the `AttributeTargets` on let values, functions, union case declarations, implicit constructors, structs, and classes. This can prevent some hard-to-notice bugs, such as forgetting to add the unit argument to an Xunit test.

Previously, you could write:

```fsharp
[<Fact>]
let ``this test always fails`` =
  Assert.True(false)
```

When you ran the tests with `dotnet test`, they would pass. Since the test function is not actually a function, it was ignored by the test runner.

Now, with correct attribute enforcement, you will get an `error FS0842: This attribute is not valid for use on this language element`.

> ## Updates to the standard library (FSharp.Core)

Reviewer 3: Should we add a link to the FSharp.Core library [Nuget](https://www.nuget.org/packages/FSharp.Core/) or docs]?

```

For a full list of functions and their variants, see ([RFC #1135](https://github.com/fsharp/fslang-design/blob/main/RFCs/FS-1135-random-functions-for-collections.md)).

### Parameterless constructor for `CustomOperationAttribute`

This constructor makes it easier to create a custom operation for a computation expression builder. It uses the name of the method instead of having to explicitly name it (when in most cases the name matches the method name already).

```fsharp
type FooBuilder() =
    [<CustomOperation>]  // Previously had to be [<CustomOperation("bar")>]
    member _.bar(state) = state
```

### C# collection expression support for F# lists and sets

When using F# lists and sets from C#, you can now use collection expressions to initialize them.

Instead of:

```csharp
FSharpSet<int> mySet = SetModule.FromArray([1, 2, 3]);
```

You can now write:

```csharp
FSharpSet<int> mySet = [ 1, 2, 3 ];
```

Collection expressions make it easier to use the F# immutable collections from C#. You might want to use the F# collections when you need their structural equality, which <xref:System.Collections.Immutable> collections don't have.

> ## Quality of life improvements

Reviewer 3: Again, I'd suggest a separate phrase here:

```suggestion
## Developer productivity improvements
```

### Parser recovery

There have been continuous improvements in parser recovery, meaning that tooling (for example, syntax highlighting) still works with code when you're in the middle of editing it and it might not be syntactically correct at all times.

For example, the parser will now recover on unfinished `as` patterns, object expressions, enum case declarations, record declarations, complex primary constructor patterns, unresolved long identifiers, empty match clauses, missing union case fields, and missing union case field types.

### Diagnostics

Diagnostics, or understanding what the compiler doesn't like about your code, are an important part of the user experience with F#. There are a number of new or improved diagnostic messages or more precise diagnostic locations in F# 9.

These include:

- Ambiguous override method in object expression
- Abstract members when used in non-abstract classes
- Property that has the same name as a discriminated union case
- Active pattern argument count mismatch
- Unions with duplicated fields
- Using `use!` with `and!` in computation expressions

> There is also a new compile-time error for classes with over 65,520 methods in generated [IL](../../standard/managed-code.md#intermediate-language--execution). Such classes aren't loadable by the CLR and would result in a run-time error. (Not that you would ever really want to have so many methods, but there have been cases with generated code.)

Reviewer 3: Some voice / style suggestions:

```suggestion
There is also a new compile-time error for classes with over 65,520 methods in generated [IL](../../standard/managed-code.md#intermediate-language--execution). Such classes aren't loadable by the CLR and result in a run-time error. (You won't author that many methods, but there have been cases with generated code.)
```

## Improvements in tooling

### Live buffers in Visual Studio

This previously opt-in feature has been thoroughly tested and is now enabled by default. The background compiler powering the IDE now works with live file buffers, meaning you don't have to save the files to disk to get the changes applied. Previously, this could cause some unexpected behavior. (Most notoriously when you tried to rename a symbol present in a file that had been edited but not saved.)

### Analyzer and code fix for removing unnecessary parentheses

Sometimes extra parentheses are used for clarity, but sometimes they are just noise. For the latter case, you now get a code fix in Visual Studio to remove them.

For example:

```fsharp
let f (x) = x // -> let f x = x
let _ = (2 * 2) + 3 // -> let _ = 2 * 2 + 3
```

### Custom visualizer support for F# in Visual Studio

The debugger visualizer in Visual Studio now works with F# projects.

![debug visualizer](../media/whats-new/fsharp-9/vs-visualizer.gif)

### Signature tooltips shown mid-pipeline

> Previously, no signature help was offered in a situation like the following, where a function in the middle of a pipeline already had a complex curried parameter (for example, a lambda) applied to it. Now, the signature tooltip shows up for the next parameter (`state`):

Reviewer 3: Wording suggestion:

```suggestion
Previously, signature help wasn't offered in a situation like the following, where a function in the middle of a pipeline already had a complex curried parameter (for example, a lambda) applied to it. Now, the signature tooltip shows up for the next parameter (`state`):
```

> ![tooltip](../media/whats-new/fsharp-9/help.png)

Reviewer 3: The lack of a newline will cause a markdown lint error:

```suggestion
![tooltip](../media/whats-new/fsharp-9/help.png)

```
